=head1 NAME

libnbd-release-notes-1.22 - release notes for libnbd 1.22

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for libnbd stable release 1.22.
This describes the major changes since 1.20.

libnbd 1.22.0 was released on B<XXX XXX 2025>.

=head2 Security

Multiple flaws in TLS server certificate checking were found and fixed
(CVE-2024-7383).  See
L<https://lists.libguestfs.org/archives/list/guestfs@lists.libguestfs.org/thread/LHR3BW6RJ7K4BJBQIYV3GTZLSY27VZO2/>
(thanks Jon Szymaniak, Daniel P. Berrangé).

If you find a security issue, please read F<SECURITY> in the source
(online here:
L<https://gitlab.com/nbdkit/libnbd/blob/master/SECURITY>).  To
find out about previous security issues in libnbd, see
L<libnbd-security(3)>.

=head2 New APIs

L<nbd_set_tls_hostname(3)> and L<nbd_get_tls_hostname(3)> can be used
to set and get the hostname used for TLS server certificate checking.
This hostname, if set, is used in preference to the hostname of the
server.  This can be used when NBD connections are proxied, or
transported over a Unix domain socket.

L<nbd_is_uri(3)> applies a heuristic to detect if something is likely
to be an NBD URI or not.

L<nbd_get_subprocess_pid(3)> returns the process ID (PID) of the
subprocess created by functions such as L<nbd_connect_command(3)>.

=head2 Enhancements to existing APIs

As an extension to L<nbd_connect_uri(3)>, you can now connect to
C<nbd+ssh://> or C<nbds+ssh://> URIs, creating an NBD tunnel over an
SSH connection.  This is very convenient when you have SSH access to a
remote host, but a firewall prevents direct access to NBD ports.

=head2 Protocol

We now print the full error message string if one is sent by the
server.  S<nbdkit E<ge> 1.42> will send full error messages from
plugins over the NBD connection to compatible NBD clients like
S<libnbd 1.22> or qemu.

=head2 Tools

Fix L<nbdfuse(1)> so that TLS URIs using C<?tls-certificates> or
C<?tls-psk-file> now work properly (Jon Szymaniak).

L<nbddump(1)> has a new I<--offset> option (Eric Blake).

=head2 Language bindings

Various fixes to the Rust bindings (thanks Hanna Czenczek).

The documentation included in the Rust bindings has been improved
greatly.

=begin comment

=head2 Tests

=end comment

=head2 Other improvements and bug fixes

Common code is now used to get the size of block devices, and this has
been fixed to work properly on BSD.  This affected at least nbdcopy
when used to copy to and from block devices on BSD.

=head2 Documentation

Fix links to L<nbd-server(1)> and other pages in HTML-generated
documentation (Vera Wu).

In L<nbd_connect_uri(3)> we documented small differences in the way
that we parse NBD URIs versus qemu.

L<nbd_connect_uri(3)> adds additional documentation on the reserved
VSock port numbers.

=head2 Build

S<gnutls E<ge> 3.5.18> is now required.  This matches the version
needed by qemu.  If using RHEL, this means that S<RHEL E<ge> 8> is now
required.

libnbd should now compile on macOS.

F<examples/connect-benchmark> is a new example that can be used to
benchmark connections.

Add support for GCC 15.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<libnbd(3)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.20.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Daniel P. Berrangé

=item Eric Blake

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=item Jon Szymaniak

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
